First, Mr. Byrd, would you kind of summarize your
early life, including the names of your parents,
the dates of their birth and death, the places
where they were born, the date and place of your
birth, and the schools you attended before you
went to A&M?
My father was James L. Byrd, and he was born on a
farm. near Corinth, Mississippi in
1857.
And my mother's name was Frances Lester Bird,
L-E-S-T-E-R. Excuse me, Smith. Her maiden name
was Smith. And she was born near Corinth,
Mississippi on a farm. And they moved to Texas.
about 1880, and Dad lived to be 95, and I've
forgotten the date of his death. Mother lived to be
71, and I've forgotten the exact date of her death,
but they're buried at Waco, Texas, where we, the
children, or the family generally was born and
reared near Waco on a cotton farm. So you were born
on a cotton farm? I was born on a cotton farm, born at
Eddy, Texas. In Falls County, and we bought a farm
in Limestone County. Drove us back to the Beacon
County seat, and then after the farm wasn't big
enough, so Dad bought a farm at Bruceville, Texas,
and built a home. And we lived there about two
years, I believe, and then bought a farm, a
200-acre farm at Hewitt, Texas, near Waco. And
that's where, in 1911, that's where we lived until
we all left home and had her own families. So how
large of a family did you? We had, I had five
brothers and five sisters. So you had a total of 11
in all. That's right, and I was next to the, next to
the youngest brother, or child, so to speak. So did
you went to school, you completed school in Waco
then? No, I completed school at Hewitt High
School, which was a a rather small high school even
in those days, or school. It was a four-room school
about six miles from Waco. And when I finished high
school there in 1916, I tried to join the Army, and I
couldn't. I was too young. Well, it was not really
in 1917. And I was 16 years old, and I couldn't get
the approval of my parents to join the Army, so they
sent me to a military school at Arlington. Texas,
which is now University of Texas at Arlington. But
it was a military school belonging to the state of
Texas. I spent two years there. Academy? Well, it
was, no, it was, well, two years high school and two
years junior college, really, is what it was. Same
as John Tarleton today. Of course, John Tarleton
Senior College today. So you went, what would be
the equivalent of two years of junior college at
No, I finished high school at the school and took
one year of college. I was sort of interested in
athletics, and the coaches sold me on the idea of
staying over. I did take my freshman college year
there. In Arlington. And I was in the military. And
that's the reason they sent me up. My mother and
daddy were real smart about this military
business. They knew I'd be satisfied if I got in the
uniform, and I was. And I was... there two years and
then went to Texas A&M in 1920. So the idea of being
in the military was one factor in your going to A&M.
That's right. Anything else involved in your
choice? No, I think I'd heard so much about A&M and
some fellows from my home community had gone to A&M
and they were highly appreciative of A&M and I
wanted to go to A&M College. And as far as entering,
then, did you have to supply a transcript to your
grades? I think I did, but I did enter as a sophomore
or freshman. You entered as a sophomore? In
classification, and a freshman, of course, my
freshman year. And then I stayed out one year and
worked in the oil fields, and then did finish with
the class I entered with, the class of 1924. You
entered as a sophomore in 1920. That's right. I
should have graduated with a class of 23 had I gone
right on. Well, as an entering sophomore, were you
subjected to any of the types of things that the
freshmen... I think, really, Charles, I was
subjected to more because I probably had lent
myself, so to speak, to that because I had been in
the military school, and I enjoyed the fun part.
And in fact, I'd been a captain in this military
school, and I knew a little bit about military, and
I might have been a year more older than most of the
freshmen. In fact, I was. But I enjoyed all those
activities that went on in the rooms and over the
campus.
Well, it was just a great experience. Were you
hazed like a freshman? I was hazed like a freshman,
and more so than a lot of the freshmen, because I was
in sophomore classes, and I think more sophomores
knew me than they would the average freshman. But
you couldn't do any hazing at that point? No, no,
no. You were a sophomore only as far as the school
was concerned. As far as the school was concerned.
Whereas the military, you were a fish. I was a fish,
a rank fish. What were your impressions of,
obviously you were somewhat familiar with A&M and
the military when you arrived. Was it really kind
of what you expected it to be when you got there? I
think it was because of the fact that I knew some
fellows who had gone to A&M or who were in A&M at home
and they had told me about A&M and I wasn't
surprised at all. It was just wonderful from the
first day I got there carrying the trunks up for the
sophomores from the depot until I graduated in
1924. When you arrived there and registered and
then were assigned or entered a military company,
did you have any choice in the company you were
assigned to? Yes, I did. And I was encouraged by
some troopers, some people in the cavalry, to join
that organization, which I did. So you opted for
the cavalry. I did. And I liked horses, too. You
stayed in the cavalry all the years. All the three
years I was there. Did being in the cavalry require
more of your time than, say, being in the infantry?
It probably did. It probably did. And we had a lot of
esprit de corps. And we had almost the entire
basketball team in our troop my freshman year who
were members of the cavalry. I mean, the varsity
basketball. And it was just a great organization.
When you were in the cavalry, did each cadet take
care of his own horse? No. No, that was done by the
military, by the army, the cavalry personnel, the
regular cavalry personnel. They took care of the
animals and the equipment. And we only saw those
animals when we drilled. And how much of the time
did you drill? We drilled two hours a week on
horses. Uh-huh. Did you also have to do marching
drill? To some extent, yes. So even though you were
ostensibly riders, you had to march some. That's
right, we had to march some, yes. Would you
describe a typical day during the time that you
were there? Well, I think a typical day during the
time I was there would be, I've forgotten the time
we would get up, but anyway, we'd dress for
breakfast. and had formation for breakfast. And
out in front of, we were in Leggett Hall at that
time. And we would, it was two troops, Troop A and B,
I was in A, and we had marched to breakfast. And then
we would return after breakfast, not in
formation, and clean our rooms and maybe two or
three sophomores' rooms. and be ready for
classes. And we did not march to Speza Hall for
lunch. You did not? We did not. I'm just pretty sure
I'm right about that, Charles, but I don't
remember all those organizations at noon. That
would have been a change to what it would have been
previously. Did they have most? Everybody else I
talked to earlier than that said they marched to
all three meals. Well, maybe we did. I know we did
the morning meal and the evening meal, and it's
possible we did, but I'd forgotten just a little
bit about that. I wasn't 100% sure that we did march
to lunch. And then what did you do in the afternoon?
And, of course, we had classes during those
periods of time. I spent quite a bit of time in the
library, and then of course we'd have meetings in
various sophomores' rooms my freshman year. Bull
session? Bull session, maybe a little bit more
than that. But it was all in fun, and I think that was
one of the things that caused A&M to be such a fine
school insofar as comradeship is concerned
because we were all the sophomores were concerned
about us and they wanted us to be they wanted us to
stay in school and and they wanted us to study and
they did see that we studied you I presume you had a
period in the evening which was required study
time that's right like we surely did and we had to be
in our rooms and and we did have about I think about
three hours. I believe that's what it was. You
indicated earlier you had spent a good bit of time
in the library. If you wanted to be in the library
during that quiet time, did you have to have a
special permit to go to the library? I would get
permission from the captain of the troop. Nothing
in writing necessarily? No, not necessarily.
That's right.
That's all my freshman year. The sophomores and
upperclassmen didn't have those. I guess they'd
go to the library anytime they wanted to. And then
between your, what was it, between your freshman
and sophomore year that you dropped out? No, I
dropped out between, see I entered as a sophomore,
and it was between my freshman, actually, the
first year. But I dropped out between my sophomore
and junior year in classification and worked in
the oil fields one summer, or one year. It was about
nine months. And then went back to school the next
fall. So you entered as a sophomore, and you joined
that same. So you entered as a sophomore in
classification. And when you came back, you were
in line with the people who were freshmen. I was a
junior with the people whom I was a freshman with.
OK.
How was the food in the mess hall?
Well, I thought the food was all right most of the
time. Of course, my freshman year, I didn't get
very much dessert. Sophomores got that. But I
think it was adequate. But I think that so many of us
are prone to criticize some of those things, and
maybe with justification, some of them. But I had
worked in the oil fields, and I'd been to this
military school before. I mean, two years before.
I went to A&M, and I thought the food was just about
what you'd expect. A little bit monotonous at
times. A little bit monotonous at times, that's
right, but just about what you'd expect. We're
feeding a great number of people. A number of
people have kind of indicated the highlight was
the steak on Thursday. Did you have steak on
Thursday? Well, I'm not sure about the date, but we
did have steak from time to time. Fortunately, I
didn't let her on the varsity, but I did play
freshman athletics some, And I got to eat on the
training table, and that's where we had those
delicious steaks every evening. Every evening.
Yeah. At that training table, say, if you played
basketball, did you eat at the training table the
whole year or just during basketball season? No,
just during the season. Seemed to be for all of the
other sports. That's right, all the rest of them,
yeah. I believe you said you were in Milner? No,
Leggett. Leggett Hall. Were you in Leggett all the
years you were there? No, I was in Leggett one year
and then Mitchell the other two. Mitchell and the
other two. Yeah. Was that, well, both of them were
relatively new at that point, were they not? No,
Leggett wasn't. Leggett's one of the old halls. In
fact, I saw that in this book of, I think, Dean Stang
was, but it's one of the early halls that was built
in an early period. And Mitchell was later. And
junior and senior year, I was in Mitchell Hall.
That's interesting. Leggett's still there in
Mitchell's, huh? That's right. I was going to make
that comment. We were down there last two or three
months ago.
Did the upperclassmen, I gather from what you've
said, this is true, but the upperclassmen, as a
rule, had a good bit more privileges than the
freshmen. They did, yes, sir. more freedom to move
around campus. What about during that quiet hour?
Did basically all four levels have to be in their
room studying? Well, I think generally they did.
I'm sure the juniors and seniors probably didn't
have to adhere to that so strictly as the
sophomores and freshmen did. Some of the
upperclassmen or sophomores were just an
overgrown freshman.
Did they line you up and march you to chapel on
Sunday? Yes, they did. In Guyon Hall? That's
right. Did the seniors have to go, too? Seniors,
maybe one senior from the Troop A cavalry, in my
instance, marched all those to Guyon Hall, just
one, as I recall. So most of the seniors skipped out
on that? Yeah, they didn't have to go. They would
alternate on that. Was that maybe because the core
was large enough that there wasn't enough room for
all of them? It could be. It could be.
At the time that you were there, what could you do
for recreation and entertainment? Well, we had
the YMCA. We could swim. And we had all those,
there's athletics going on all the time, some type
of athletics. Mm-hmm. And we might be interested
in company basketball, or company baseball, or
company football. And of course, there's always
some sessions in the various rooms. Being in the
cavalry, we were able to go on some hikes with our
horses, riding horses on weekends occasionally
when we could get permission to do that. Now, would
this be the whole company or just individuals? No,
it would be just individuals, two or three or four
or five individuals. Just to go kind of check out a
horse? That's right, that's right. Go for a good
ride. Yeah, that's right.
Okay.
was, this is not really entertainment and
recreation, but I believe the year after you
graduated was the year that Harold Dunn had his
famous hamburger stand on the campus. But he told
me that that stand was there two or three years
before that. It was. It was near Speeds to Hall, as I
recall, and it was a newsstand and a hamburger
stand. News and hamburger combined. Yeah, when I
knew it. He didn't indicate that he had anything to
do with the newspapers. It might have been
magazines. So that was there for if anybody wanted
supplemental food. Was there still Casey's
Confectionery in the basement? That was a central
meeting point. Somebody had 15 or 25 cents to buy a
malted milk. That was in the basement of the Y.
That's the basement of the Y, and I think the Y is
still there. Yeah, the Y is still there. The
swimming pool is not there. No. Nor is the
confectionery. Yeah. But were there any rooms in
the Y that people could stay as there
traditionally is in a Y? Charles, I'm not real
sure. I am not positive about that, but we had Alpha
and Beta Hall where people could stay. And they
were located where? They were located up near
Speza. Now that was before the Aggieland Inn. Yes,
that's right.
So I believe at one point, I understood Alpha and
Beta Hall were non-military dorms. That's right.
Well, they could have been. Maybe World War I
veterans. I'd rather think those are the fellows
who stayed there. But did they also have rooms that
the visitor could stay in? I'm just sure in alpha
and beta because I stayed there two or three times
after I graduated from A&M. I would be at A&M
visiting A&M, and I have stayed there.
Did you have any favorite instructors? Well, I had
some real fine instructors that I just loved right
on down through the years.
I think Dr. C.C. Hedges, chemistry department, I
enjoyed him very, very much. And I enjoyed Dr. O.M.
Ball, the head of the botany department. My major
was agronomy. And I think one reason I appreciated
Dr. Ball so much, because being in a sophomore
class, my freshman year, I was taking botany my
freshman year as a sophomore. And Dr. Ball
recognized the fact that I was being hazed by those
sophomores, and I think he's the one professor
whom I had a drag with, so to speak. That's how we
expressed it back in those days, because he
thought I was being abused by the sophomores. And
it was great fun, but he was a great instructor. And
Dr. Jones in the English department, and Colonel
Ike Ashburn, commandant, I thought he was a grand
person, and I admired him greatly, and he was
thoroughly capable. You indicated you had spent a
good bit of time in the library. Did you ever have
any contact with Dr. Mayo? Yes, I did. English. I
surely did. And he also was a librarian, I believe.
That's right, he was. And Captain Davis, I've
forgotten his first name and initials, but he was
head of the cavalry. at the time I was there, and he
was a great military person. I admired him a great
deal. He would have been, what, directly under Ike
Ashburn? Well, yes, yes. I don't know just what
Ike's relationship was with the regular military
personnel on that campus. It gets a little vague to
me. He had been out of the military for a number of
years. He had been a colonel, yeah. But he was
commandant of the cadets, of the cadet corps,
really. That was his title. He would have been a
colonel perhaps during the First World War. Yes.
And then he was out of the military for a while.
That's right. He was actually a civilian
commandant. That's right. He was not reappointed
to the military. No, he did not wear a uniform.
But he was very well liked by the students overall.
Greatly appreciated by the students. He was fair
and fine, and being a military man, he stood up tall
and sat down. Tall in the saddle, I'll say, and
everybody had a great deal of respect for him.
What about the students' attitude to the
president, Dr. Brazell? Well, Dr. Brazell was one
of the fine gentlemen I've known in college or out
of college. He was a great person. And I know the
students respected Dr. Brazell a great deal.
because he was a gentleman and a great educator. I
had always, and I really have no real reason to
change my attitude. In what I had heard and read
about Dr. Brazell, I thought he must have been
really something, one of the best they've had
there for a long time. I think so. One of, another
former student brought to us, I guess I would call
it an underground newspaper called the Longbat
that was, I believe, in January of 24. And I was a
little bit puzzled by one of the student
editorials in there that indicated they were
complaining, I guess, about censorship of
student opinions. And I don't know whether it was
in the battalion that there was censorship or
what, but anyway, the guy who wrote the editorial
said something to the effect that he was
complaining about not being able to say what you
really thought. And he said, if you don't believe
this is right, why, get up in the middle of the main
building and say what you think, and then count how
many minutes it is till the next train comes
through, and that's how long you have to stay.
Well, I didn't have that feeling about Dr. Brazell
or anyone on that campus, and I might not have been
that close to him. Well, I really never did know for
sure whether it was Dr. Brazell they were talking
about or the commandant or whether they were
talking about... I don't think they were talking
about upperclassmen because I understood that it
was a group of seniors who got out this issue of the
newspaper.
Now, those seniors, would they have been in the
class of 24? I believe so.
I don't remember anything about that. I believe it
was January 24 that they called it. It was a little
bitty thing about, oh, 12, 14 inches tall and about
10 or 11 inches wide. It was a four-page thing
called the long bat. And I believe they had some
things to say about the barbershop, and I believe
Charlie Nitchie was still there in the tailor
shop. He was a tailor. I'm not sure, but they were a
little bit unkind to Casey's Confectionery.
Well, I have an idea. Those boys just wanted to,
they were becoming young men, I think, possibly
they just wanted to express themselves. I think
that's psychologically a fact many times when we
want to criticize something, we just want to
launch out. One
of the things that I have thought since I've been in
A&M that makes it a, An interesting institution
and different from others is the number of
traditions that exist there carried on by the
students from year to year. And I'm thinking in
terms of old Yale practice, the silver taps, the
bonfire, and things of that nature. How many of
these were in existence during your years there?
Well, those three or four ones that you mentioned
were certainly We had silver taps, and it happened
at least twice while I was there. And we had yell
practice, which we thoroughly enjoyed, and I
think that was something that brought us together
and made us feel as one. And the general, of course,
it was all cadet corps, except the casuals, who
were World War I veterans. My freshman in South
Wales, Not necessarily the World War. Well, some
of them were veterans who had been, stayed out of
school a while. And I know one of my real fine
friends was a World War, had been in the Navy in
World War I. And he finished in my class, and he was
not in the cadet corps. And those, but anyway. He
was not in the cadet corps at all. No, not at all. And
many, and I won't, quite a few weren't in the cadet
corps. And they were not in the cadet corps because
of the fact they had served in World War I. even
though it might have been, well, 1920. Of course,
the war was over in 1918.
But I think the Yale practice, and I'm not so sure
about the bonfire. We had some, but not to the
magnitude that they do it now. But we did have a
great spirit. And did you have a muster on April
21st? I'm just sure we did not. I don't recall that.
But how about, did you have a holiday? I'm not real
sure about that. I had understood from what I had
been able to find out about the start of that 1903
that the students objected to going to school on
Texas Independence Day.
Or is that Texas Independence Day? Anyway, on that
particular date. And so they sort of declared an
unofficial holiday and had a muster, so to speak.
Well, I'm sorry I'm not sure about that, but I'm
really not. We recognized April 21st. Today we
have school, but we have a muster at 5 o'clock. And
it's observed pretty much worldwide, though, by
former students. And I guess it really is more of a
former student ceremony than a student one. You
mentioned a minute ago that the veterans of the
First World War were not in the Corps of Cadets, and
I think there had always been a number who were
physically incapable of carrying out the
military duties. Was there any period during the
time that you were there that that anybody other
than the veterans and the physically handicapped
could, say, discontinue the Corps after the first
couple years? Charles, I don't think there was. I
just don't think there was. Somebody I talked to
yesterday indicated, well, he dropped out of the
Corps after a couple years, but then he said in
their senior year, I think he was there for five
years, and last year he had to wear a uniform. For
two years, he didn't wear a uniform. Well, those
who... And I think that came later when they were
not given commissions in the junior year. I mean,
they were not qualified to go on and get a
commission.
Quite a few of those fellows didn't know anything
about that until the end of their senior year. I
know there's several that were still in the cadet
corps who did not get reserve commissions. This
was when you were in school? When I was in school,
that's right. Was that because they were somewhat
deficient in their military interest, I'd say. I
think most anyone could have gotten commission
had they been interested enough in military.
Reserve commission.
We know that a number of students throughout the
history of A&M have been part-time employees in
one form or another. Did you have any jobs? I didn't
have any jobs, Charles. I worked in the oil fields a
total of nine months in the summer. You didn't have
any part-time jobs? I didn't have any part-time
jobs.
We had a wonderful farm at home, and the family
could have sent me to school. But I wanted to get a
little independent, and I did make my way the last
two or three years in the oil fields, working in the
oil fields. And I did not work at A&M. So you worked
in the oil fields in the summer? In the summer,
except when I went to two ROTC camps. Shirley?